.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.\" Man page for photonicat-pm kernel driver
.TH PCAT-PM-CTL 4 "February 2026" "Linux" "Linux Programmer's Manual"
.SH NAME
pcat-pm-ctl \- Photonicat power manager control device
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /dev/pcat-pm-ctl
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B pcat-pm-ctl
device provides a raw interface to communicate with the Photonicat 2
power management unit (PMU) over the serial protocol.
.PP
Most PMU features are accessible through dedicated sysfs attributes
or kernel interfaces (see below). This device serves as an escape
hatch for advanced use cases such as multi-entry scheduled boot.
.PP
Userspace writes a complete protocol frame; the kernel assigns a
frame number, recomputes the CRC, and forwards allowed commands to
the PMU. Selected PMU responses can be read back (supports
.BR poll (2)).
This includes PMU hardware and firmware version acknowledgment frames;
the driver still updates the corresponding sysfs attributes internally.
See
.I photonicat-pm.h
for the protocol frame format and command definitions.
.SS MCU Firmware Capability Policy
The driver selects non-RTC capability quirks when the PMU firmware version
acknowledgment is received. RTC and scheduled boot do not trust firmware
version strings: every firmware starts with RTC disabled as
.BR pending-probe
and must pass runtime validation before RTC operations are enabled.
.TS
tab(|);
l l.
Firmware|Driver policy
RA2E1260306000|Stuck-100%; RTC pending-probe until runtime validation; energy ignored.
Other RA2E1*|Baseline; RTC pending-probe until runtime validation; energy/fan untrusted.
Older/invalid|Legacy; RTC pending-probe until runtime validation; no stuck-100% quirk.
.TE
.PP
For ABI stability,
.I /dev/rtc0
remains registered while RTC capability is pending.
.SS Power Supply
.TP
.B /sys/class/power_supply/battery/
Battery status, capacity (0\-100%), voltage, and current (read-only).
.IP
Current firmware capability profiles do not validate PMU protocol v2
status-report energy values as live or measured battery energy. This driver
ignores PMU-reported energy values:
.B energy_full
is the static
.B energy-full-design-microwatt-hours
value from the
.B simple-battery
device-tree node, not PMU-measured full capacity;
.B energy_now
is not exported by current releases.
.TP
.B /sys/class/power_supply/charger/
Charger online status and input voltage (read-only).
.SS Real-Time Clock & Scheduled Boot
.TP
.B /dev/rtc0
Real-time clock backed by PMU. Supports RTC alarms for scheduled
power-on. When an alarm is set, the driver sends the alarm time to
the PMU via UART (SCHEDULE_STARTUP_TIME_SET). The PMU stores this
and will power on the board at the specified time, even when fully
powered off. The alarm is one-shot (non-recurring). Standard Linux
RTC tools such as
.BR rtcwake (8)
work through this interface.
.IP
All firmware starts in
.BR pending-probe ;
the device remains registered, but RTC reads report invalid data and alarm
programming fails until the driver observes three consecutive valid, monotonic
PMU RTC samples and promotes the capability to
.BR enabled-probe .
No firmware version string enables RTC or scheduled boot by itself.
Raw scheduled-boot commands sent through
.I /dev/pcat-pm-ctl
are gated by the same RTC capability state.
.SS Sensors & Fan
.TP
.B /sys/class/thermal/thermal_zone*/
Motherboard temperature as a kernel thermal zone. Only present when
.B #thermal-sensor-cells = <0>
is set in the
.B pcat-pm
device tree node and a
.B thermal-zones
binding references it. When present, the kernel thermal governor can
automatically drive the fan cooling device based on board temperature.
.TP
.B /sys/class/thermal/cooling_device*/
Fan control via the thermal cooling device whose
.B type
attribute is
.BR pcat\-pm\-fan .
Cooling-device indexes are not stable; discover the device by type before
writing
.BR cur_state .
Values 0\-100 set fan speed percentage.
.TP
.B /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/fan_state
Fan management state (read-only). Returns
.B unmanaged
if the driver has not sent a SET command since loading (the PMU could be at
unmanaged fan speed or at a previously-set managed fan speed from before a reboot), or the
managed fan speed percentage (0\-100) once set by the driver.
.IP
Current firmware capability profiles expose no trusted API to reset fan
control back to PMU auto speed.
.B unmanaged
only means the driver has not sent a fan SET command since loading. Due to
that limitation, it may sometimes mean the PMU retained the last fixed speed
instead of returning to PMU auto speed. In managed fan speed, after shutdown,
the fan stays at the last fixed speed and will not adjust on its own. If the
retained speed is low and the device is still charging or otherwise thermally
active, this can be unsafe for thermal management.
.SS LEDs & Peripherals
.TP
.B /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/status_led
Status LED control (read-write). Write 1 to enable, 0 to disable.
.TP
.B /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/beeper
Beeper control (read-write). Write 1 to enable, 0 to disable.
.TP
.B /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/net_status_led_on_time
Network status LED on time in milliseconds (read-write, 0\-65535).
.TP
.B /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/net_status_led_off_time
Network status LED off time in milliseconds (read-write, 0\-65535).
.TP
.B /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/net_status_led_repeat
Network status LED repeat count (read-write, 0\-65535). 0 = infinite.
.TP
.B /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/movement_trigger
Accelerometer-based motion detection (read-only). Returns 1 if motion
detected, 0 otherwise.
.SS PMU Information
.TP
.B /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/pmu_hw_version
PMU hardware version string (read-only). Queried from PMU on driver load.
The raw version acknowledgment frame is also forwarded to
.IR /dev/pcat-pm-ctl .
.TP
.B /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/pmu_fw_version
PMU firmware version string (read-only). Queried from PMU on driver load.
The raw version acknowledgment frame is also forwarded to
.IR /dev/pcat-pm-ctl ,
which allows tools such as
.BR pcat-pmu-updater
.B --pmu-fw-version-get
to read the response through the control device.
.TP
.B /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/pmu_rtc_capability
PMU RTC policy state (read-only). Values:
.BR pending-probe
or
.BR enabled-probe .
.TP
.B /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/power_on_event
Last power-on event code (read-only). Values: 0 = unknown,
1 = power button, 2 = scheduled, 3 = charger connected, 4 = USB.
.SS Configuration
.TP
.B /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/charger_on_auto_start
Charger auto-start control (read-write). Write 1 to enable automatic
startup when charger is connected, 0 to disable.
.SH DEVICE TREE
The driver reads configuration from the device tree node at probe time.
.SS Required Properties
.TP
.B compatible
Must be \(dqphotonicat-pm\(dq.
.SS Optional Properties
.TP
.B power-gpio
GPIO pin wired to PMU power-sense input (active high). Pulled low at
shutdown to signal the PMU. Get the pin from the board schematic; omit
if no such wire exists.
.TP
.B baudrate
Serial port baud rate. Must match the PMU firmware's configured speed.
Default: 115200.
.TP
.B force-poweroff-timeout
Forced power off timeout in seconds (0\\-255). Sent to the PMU via
WATCHDOG_TIMEOUT_SET command at driver probe. When non-zero, the PMU will
force power off after this many seconds following a software shutdown.
Practical range is 0\\-60; values >60 are ineffective because the driver
also sends a hardcoded 60 s watchdog timeout that triggers first.
When set to 0, only the 60 s watchdog guards against hangs.
Default: 0 (disabled).
.TP
.B pm-version
PMU protocol version (1 or 2). Determined by the PMU firmware on the
board. Version 2 adds battery current and PMU-reported capacity.
Default: 1.
.TP
.B #thermal-sensor-cells
Must be
.B <0>
when present. Exposes the motherboard temperature to the kernel thermal
framework so that a
.B thermal-zones
binding in the board DTS can reference this node via
.BR thermal-sensors .
Without this property the driver still registers an hwmon sensor but no
thermal zone.
.SH HWMON SENSORS
The driver registers hardware monitoring devices accessible via
.BR sensors (1):
.TP
.B pcat_pm_hwmon_temp_mb-*
Motherboard temperature sensor.
.TP
.B pcat_pm_hwmon_speed_fan-*
Fan speed in RPM.
.PP
The motherboard temperature is also registered as a kernel thermal zone
(see
.B /sys/class/thermal/thermal_zone*/
above) when the device tree provides the required binding.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Read battery capacity:
.B cat /sys/class/power_supply/battery/capacity
.TP
Read static design full charge capacity:
.B cat /sys/class/power_supply/battery/energy_full
.TP
Check that live energy is not exported:
.B test ! \-e /sys/class/power_supply/battery/energy_now
.TP
Check fan management state:
.B cat /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/fan_state
.TP
Set fan to 50% from bash, zsh, or fish:
.RS
.nf
sudo sh \-c '
speed=$1
fan_cdev=
for cdev in /sys/class/thermal/cooling_device*; do
    [ "$(cat "$cdev/type" 2>/dev/null)" = "pcat\-pm\-fan" ] || continue
    fan_cdev=$cdev
    break
done
[ \-n "$fan_cdev" ] || { echo "pcat\-pm\-fan cooling device not found" >&2; exit 1; }
echo "$speed" > "$fan_cdev/cur_state"
\&' sh 50
.fi
.RE
.TP
Check motion detection:
.B cat /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/movement_trigger
.TP
Turn on status LED:
.B echo 1 > /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/status_led
.TP
Turn off beeper:
.B echo 0 > /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/beeper
.TP
Read PMU firmware version:
.B cat /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/pmu_fw_version
.TP
Read PMU RTC capability state:
.B cat /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/pmu_rtc_capability
.TP
Read power-on event:
.B cat /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/power_on_event
.TP
Set net LED blink pattern (50ms on, 50ms off):
.B "echo 50 > /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/net_status_led_on_time && echo 50 > /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/net_status_led_off_time"
.TP
Power off now, automatically power on after 60 seconds:
.B rtcwake -m off -s 60
.TP
Power off now, automatically power on at the specified time:
.B rtcwake -m off -t $(date -d \(dq2026-02-11 08:00:00\(dq +%s)
.TP
Enable charger auto-start:
.B echo 1 > /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/charger_on_auto_start
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /dev/pcat-pm-ctl
Raw PMU command interface
.TP
.I /sys/kernel/photonicat-pm/
Sysfs attributes
.SH DEBUGGING
PMU command logging uses the kernel
.BR dev_dbg (9)
facility. Messages are off by default.
.SS Runtime (Dynamic Debug)
If the kernel has
.B CONFIG_DYNAMIC_DEBUG
enabled (most distributions do):
.PP
.RS
.nf
# Enable PMU command logs
echo 'file pcat\-pm\-uart.c +p' > /sys/kernel/debug/dynamic_debug/control

# Disable
echo 'file pcat\-pm\-uart.c \-p' > /sys/kernel/debug/dynamic_debug/control

# View logs
dmesg | grep "PMU cmd="
.fi
.RE
.SS Build Time
Add
.B \-DDEBUG
to the module CFLAGS in
.I src/Makefile
to enable all
.BR dev_dbg (9)
messages unconditionally:
.PP
.RS
.nf
ccflags\-y += \-DDEBUG
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sensors (1),
.BR hwmon (4),
.BR rtc (4),
.BR rtcwake (8),
.BR power_supply (4),
.BR thermal (4)
.SH AUTHORS
Kyosuke Nekoyashiki <supercatexpert@gmail.com>
.br
HackingGate <i@hackinggate.com>
